[Music]
I was very much struck by how the
translation of the biblical writings
jump started the development of literacy
across the entire world illiteracy was
the norm the pastor's home was the first
school and every morning it would begin
with singing the Christian faith is a
singing religion probably 80 percent of
Scripps memorization today exists only
because of what is sung this is amazing
here we have a Gutenberg Bible printed
on the Press of Johan goodberg science
and religion are opposing forces in the
world but historically that has not been
the case now the book is available to
everyone from Shakespeare to modern
education and medicine and science to to
civilization itself it is the most
influential book in all history and
hopefully people can walk away with at
least a sense of that
some of the scientists the media the
politicians and the ngos have quite
unreasonably
hyped the alleged climate threat both
climate and energy are complicated
nuanced subjects they can't be distilled
down into sound bites what we do
involves trade-offs and the politicians
will not let the public be informed
enough about those trade-offs to make a
a decision it really is in part a
problem of complexity right I mean
because you can imagine that there's
there's an attraction to
relatively simple
hypotheses and maybe that's a good one
that's Occam's razor in some sense
although you don't want your
explanations to be any simpler than they
need to be and so we have well it's
reasonable to be concerned about the
environment part of the environment is
climate part of climate is carbon
dioxide maybe we should just focus on
carbon dioxide and then we're doing the
right thing and that's where people get
LED down the Garden Path because you
don't get to be a planetary Savior by
jumping up and down and saying carbon
dioxide is bad
like it it that's too oversimplified
[Music]
hello everyone I'm continuing my
investigation today into the well I'd
say energy and environment Nexus
investigating the apocalyptic nightmare
that's our hypothetical future and I've
been talking to a lot of people recently
about that and today I get to talk to Dr
Stephen coonan who's um extremely well
qualified to be discussing both issues
energy and environment he is a senior
fellow at the Hoover Institute and a
university professor at New York
University with appointments in the
stern School of Business the Tandon
School of Engineering and the department
of physics Dr coonan's current research
focuses on climate science and Energy
Technologies through a series of
Articles and lectures that began in 2014
coonan has advocated for a more accurate
complete and transparent public
representation
of climate and energy matters
he wrote a best-selling book unsettled
what climate science tells us what it
doesn't and why it matters was published
in 2021
coonan has a multi-dimensional career he
served as under secretary for science in
the U.S department of energy from 09 to
11 where he led the inaugural
quadrennial technology review before
joining the government he spent five
years as Chief scientist for British
Petroleum helping them think through the
development of alternatives to fossil
fuels for almost 30 years he was a
professor of theoretical physics at
Kel-Tec and he also served there for
nine years as vice president and Provost
facilitating the research of more than
300 scientists and engineers and
catalyzing multiple research initiatives
in addition to the National Academy of
Sciences Conan's memberships included
the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences and the Jason group of
scientists who solve technical problems
for the US government he's been a
trustee of the institute for defense
analysis since 2014 and is currently an
independent governor
of the Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory he served similarly for Los
Alamos Sandia Brookhaven and Argonne
National Labs
he has a BS in physics from Caltech and
a PhD in theoretical physics from MIT
he's the author of The Classic 1985
textbook computational physics and has
published 200 peer-reviewed papers in
the fields of physics astrophysics
scientific Community computation energy
technology and policy and climate
science looking forward very much to
talking to Dr coonan today
okay so so the first thing that we need
to point out to everyone is that Dr
coonan is by any standard and
outstanding scientist 200 Publications
would put him in at minimum the top one
percent of published research scientists
so in caltech's a deadly institution or
at least it was up there with MIT and
and one of the jewels in the University
of California system and then it not
only no no no no no no it's a private
university it's not one of the universe
oh I'm sorry I'm sorry it's Caltech
Caltech yeah yeah that's my mistake my
mistake but yeah a small West Coast
Technical School as we used to describe
right right right right right so do you
think that there's an engine do you
think that there's a stem School in the
U.S that has a better reputation than
Caltech other than MIT
well uh you know I used to like to say
when I know both institutions very well
I used to like to say Caltech was like
the best fifth of MIT
um it's about one-fifth of size right uh
but in terms of and again it depends on
which discipline you're looking at but
overall you can't really distinguish
between Caltech and MIT and in some
domain Sanford uh these are all really
good schools right right and the best of
Science and Engineering not only the
education but for this discussion more
importantly the research okay so now you
also another thing for everyone to
consider here is that Dr coonan has also
not only worked as a researcher and a
lecturer Etc but he also worked as a
scientific administrator I think that's
the probably the right phraseology
within the university system so was able
to evaluate and track and learn about a
variety of different scientific
disciplines but then also worked in the
private sector for BP we should address
that right off the bat and then in
government so you really have a broad
very very broad background
professionally now I suppose the thing
the appointment in principle that makes
you least credible on the client climate
denial front is probably your posting at
British Petroleum because yeah yeah so
tell let's talk about that so why
doesn't that sound so chill like BP
right so so
um I'm I'm this is about 1980 uh 95
sorry 2004 and I had my name had been
fed into a search that BP was running
for the chief scientist and eventually I
get a call from the then CEO John Brown
and he says uh come come beat you
scientists and I said I don't know
anything about the oil business or the
energy business I know energy is
conserved I'm a physicist but I don't
know about practical energy and he says
don't worry you'll learn
and they brought me in
not to help them find oil or gas they
were very good at that they didn't need
me to do that but to figure out what
Beyond petroleum which was the tagline
at the time what Beyond petroleum really
meant in terms of Technologies in terms
of viable businesses and so I picked up
the family and we moved from Pasadena to
London I moved from Academia to the
private sector and I I'd like to say for
the first couple years I was the world's
highest paid graduate student because I
had one of the company run of the
industry just learning all this stuff
about practical energy
in the end I think I helped them quite a
bit over the five years I was there
teaching them how to think about energy
what technologies were promising what
ones might actually make a difference in
terms of the environment but also in
terms of a viable business so it was a
you know a wonderful experience and I
would assert one of the problems we have
today is that people who talk about
energy don't really understand energy
systems or the energy businesses and any
academic who's working in those fields I
would say go spend a year in the private
sector because it will change your
perspective enormously okay well let's
delve into that a little bit so you you
opened up two Avenues of questioning
there I would say one is well three why
did you decide to go to leave academic
Academia and go to the private sector
what did you learn about
say Beyond petroleum I mean first of all
I think it's rather peculiar in some
real sense that British Petroleum has as
its motto Beyond petroleum given that
the fossil fuel industry is so necessary
and stable but it's very interesting
that they have done that and then so I'm
very curious to pick your brain about
what you actually saw as promising if
anything on the Alternative Energy front
so and uh and then I guess the third
question is what did you learn as a
consequence of working in Private
Industry that you really didn't know
when you were working in Academia oh
yeah okay okay wow that that's that's a
very broad palette let me just talk
personally why did I decide to leave
yeah I had been Provost which is second
in command at Caltech for nine years
when BP approached me
um nine years is a long time to spend in
in any job particularly one that's as
demanding as trying to Corral 280
faculty together and oversee the
research operation
um I had always been interested in the
private sector
and
food discussions with colleagues I
understood that energy and climate were
hot topics uh and well worth
investigating so you know something uh
as usual I took a leave first to see how
it would work out and was on me for two
years while I was getting settled into
BP
um and those were the motivations I was
just interested uh in energy at the time
of course there was the opportunity to
go live in London uh and get exposed to
a much bigger world than I was involved
with in Pasadena right right so there's
a lot of that returned by curiosity
sounds yeah
a lot of my you know a lot of my life is
about curiosity yeah it sounds like I've
always had fun doing what I'm doing and
with a physicist tools and physicist
orientation you just like to do that I
mean as one of my elders once told me
when I was a young faculty member a PhD
in theoretical physics is a licensed to
poke your nose into anybody's business
right and I've just had great fun right
doing that right so and go ahead go
ahead oh I was just gonna Second Street
return return now to this issue of of
what did you learn on the energy front I
mean what did you see as promising let's
say outside of petroleum and and and in
what Manner and why was BP interested in
that
yeah so BP was interested like a lot of
energy companies at the time and and
still uh for several reasons
one is look the purpose of a private
company is to make money and to do it
legally and to do it predictably
uh they have to do that in the
environment the regulatory environment
the technology the economics these days
the stakeholder environment and so I
think the CEO at the time John Brown
um was one of the first leaders in the
oil business to recognize we had better
take this low-carbon business seriously
if only because that's where the
stakeholders and the government were
going
um I I think that nicely segues into you
know what did I learn about business we
can talk about energy in a minute but
what I learned is first of all it is
about making money and it is about
reliably delivering a quality product
it is about taking risk particularly in
the oil and gas business you invest a
lot of money up front in the expectation
that over 20 or 30 years the revenues
from the oil you produce the gas you
produce are will pay back so it's a lot
of capital upfront big bets sometimes
risky uh in a very complicated
regulatory environment particularly for
an international company so you know one
of the things I I came to admire were
the people who led these organizations
how they managed to juggle so many
different dimensions at once it's a lot
harder than just sitting in your office
and scribbling on a piece of paper about
equations right and it's very
complicated
um another thing I learned is that
energy is about scale
um you know unless you're really going
to introduce a technology that's going
to make a material difference
at least at the few percent level
nationally or globally uh you're not
really doing very much you might be
making money which is fine but if you
want to impact the Energy System it's
about scale and so I'll give you one
example just to illustrate that I I was
once talking to a famous guy who shall
remain nameless
um was not an energy expert this was
policy guy and he says I know what the
answer is we take all of the carbon in
the used tires and recycle it into fuel
and okay he said this with great Passion
uh and so I sat down for a minute after
we talked or even as we were talking and
I calculated how many cars in the U.S
and how many tires and so on and how
much carbon is there and it turns out it
can't make a difference at all right
it's very tiny and so people don't
understand the scale yeah well there's
nothing more annoying than arithmetic
yeah right well you know that's then I
was a physicist that's my first
inclination right how big is it how much
is it going to make a difference how
much is it going to cost uh and so on in
the department owners who used to talk
about you know new technologies is
impacting quads of energy the US uses
about 100 quads of energy a year quads
barrels of oil the world uses 100
million barrels of oil a day about and
so what and then tons of what's a quad a
quad is 10 to the 18th joules roughly
it's actually 10 of the 18th um I'm
sorry 10 of the 15th BTUs but it's just
about 10 of the 18th joules all right
and the U.S uses about a hundred quads
of energy a year the world as a whole
uses about 550 or 600 quads a year so
think about that for a second in terms
of energy the US is only four and a half
percent of the world's population but we
use about 20 of its energy
so not because we're energy pigs or
energy gluttons but in fact uh because
that energy improves our quality of life
enormously well people aren't going to
be energy pigs or energy gluttons as a
general rule because energy isn't free
and so everyone is motivated to the
degree that they can be motivated by
reasonable energy pricing to be as
effective and efficient as they possibly
can be and I suppose maybe you can
produce a small increment in that
efficiency by raising the price but that
doesn't strike me as a particularly good
solution so what did you see as
promising on the alternative to fossil
fuel front
promise yeah so uh right and and let me
answer that question in the present day
rather than in the uh 15 years ago when
I was thinking hard about those things
for BP
uh
you know
um first of all it's really hard to get
rid of chemical fuels for Transportation
uh if you think about a truck or a train
you really are playing you need the
energy density that fossil fuels provide
um you know we run our cars on gasoline
or in Europe in diesel
and we want to shift to electric and I
think that shift is slowly underway
though there are many barriers
but when you put your
the nozzle of the pump in your car
you're wielding about 10 megawatts of
power
whereas if we charge up the battery on
an electric car
we're talking about 100th of the power
flow so it's really hard to beat the
energy in chemical fuels and so some
fresh the world is still going to run on
chemical fuels
they the fuels we use today emit carbon
fossil carbon because we dig the oil out
of the ground and uh use it to make
gasoline which then enters the
atmosphere we could make those fuels out
of biological materials and we've been
doing that in the U.S by making corn
ethanol which is a phenomenally
inefficient and not very environmentally
friendly way of doing it but there are
other biological ways of getting
carbon interview and when I was in the
department of energy and in BP this
intersection of biology and energy
making chemical fuels out of biological
materials was something we thought was
very
promising we started a whole Institute
at Berkeley in Illinois to pursue that I
think it's still in the research and
development stage but if we're going to
have
transportation fuels for heavy
Transportation then I think this
biofuels is going to be very important
do you could do you worry about the
competition between cropland utilized
for biofuels and food production are you
thinking more about Oceanic like algae
or LJ no no algae doesn't yeah algae is
kind of tough actually for various
technical reasons uh we we would grow
things
um but you know the idea was to use
plants that do not compete for farmland
or to use the waste part of food of the
cellulose uh rather than the
carbohydrates and is there is there
anything on that front that's viable
like commercial and at scale at the
moment or or no no no no we can't do it
it's the cost uh which is really the
issue
um you know you got to break down the
cellulose which is the structural
material of the plants into sugars and
then ferment the sugars and the cost
right now is still two to three times
what gasoline uh costs okay well so so
we could say and people do say well damn
the cost that it's real costly if the
planet burns up in a hundred years and
so why not just force people to or
require or incentivize people to you
know pay three or four times as much for
their energy usage now
well I think uh you know as we've seen
in France uh and other places when you
try to do that uh people get very upset
uh and in fact there's tremendous
disruption and and in fact you know this
whole energy transition that we're
talking about if you do it too rapidly
it's tremendously disruptive because
energy touches every part of our lives
and so you got to go slow there is no
climate crisis we can get on to that in
a bit uh let us take our time develop
the Technologies introduce them
gracefully and eventually we do
submissions as required yeah well that
that graceful introduction doesn't seem
to me to be something that can manage be
managed from a top-down perspective very
straightforwardly I mean first of all
we're seeing a tremendous amount of
instability on the energy provision
front in Europe at the moment partly
because of winter partly because of the
war partly because of um
I would say clueless hypothetically
environmentally oriented policies in the
past and but so let me lay out a couple
of the problems I see with Renewables
and tell me what you think about sure
okay sure well the first is that
obviously and this has really been a
problem in the UK recently you don't get
a lot of electricity when the wind isn't
blowing and the sun isn't shining and
we've had prolonged periods of wind
drought in the winter in the UK and
that's a real catastrophe now people
object do you know the the the German
word Dunkle flauta Yes you heard that
word yes yes okay so yeah which for
other people who haven't heard it it
means when the wind doesn't blow and the
sun doesn't shine so you get no
electricity from wind or solar uh the
German translation is something like a
dark Stillness right right well
um and so
we hear a lot of uh noise about the cost
benefit and effectiveness of Renewables
but that the the cost of renewable
energy on the wind and solar front is
generally estimated
at the cost when the wind is blowing and
the sun is shining not when it's dark
and there's no wind at all because the
price actually moves towards the
infinite at that point now the problem
technically as far as I can tell apart
from whatever environmental damage wind
and solar might be producing in and of
themselves like the death of birds and
bats for example the big problem seems
to me to be twofold one is that they're
cyclic uh on a daily basis and a weekly
basis on a monthly basis and we don't
have good storage and it isn't obvious
we're going to have it soon and storage
itself everything that needs to be mined
and so forth to make batteries has no a
non-negligible environmental cost so it
doesn't it doesn't have to be sewage so
let me back up yeah yeah okay so we're
on the electrical grid now and we would
like our grid to have three qualities
first of all it should be reliable the
reliability standard in North America is
like one day out of a decade that the
bulk power system should go down the
second is we would like it to be
affordable yeah if electricity prices
get too high it's a terrible disruption
and the third thing is we'd like it to
be clean pain both in a local pollution
sense but also in a CO2 right emission
sense so reliable affordable and clean I
like to think about the old joke during
the Cold War uh you know smart honest
and communist choose two out of three
all right so reliable affordable clean
we have a reliable and affordable system
based on coal and natural gas
you can be reliable and clean if you do
nuclear energy or you do carbon capture
and storage with gas or coal or you can
be
affordable and clean uh with wind and
solar but you can't have all three the
most expensive part of a useful grid is
the reliability right it's not the wind
and solar and because you can have up to
a month's worth of Dunkle flauta where
the wind and soil are not producing at
all the backup system whatever it is
needs to be at least as capable as the
wind and solar system which means the
cost is going to be at least double
because wind and solar are the cheapest
right all right so and people have done
detailed studies using real weather data
and cost for wind and solar and nuclear
or batteries and so on and it turns out
that we're going to at least double if
not triple the cost of electricity if we
go to a renewable heavy grid and I don't
think that's a very good thing at all
well you know wind and solar can be a
supplement to an existing grid but they
can never be the backbone
whether you're selling footballs or fine
art Shopify simplifies selling online
and in person so that you can focus on
growing your business Shopify covers
every sales channel from an in-person
POS system to an all-in-one e-commerce
platform it even helps you sell across
social media marketplaces like Tick Tock
Facebook and Instagram
you don't need to be a designer to know
how to code shopify's industry leading
tools give you complete control over
your business and your brand 24 7
support and an extensive Business course
Library are available to support you
every step of the way Shopify is the
e-commerce platform revolutionizing
millions of businesses worldwide if
you're ready to get serious about
selling try Shopify today sign up for a
one dollar per month trial period at
shopify.com jbp all lowercase go to
shopify.com jbp to take your business to
the next level today that's shopify.com
jbp
okay so so let's delve into that a
little bit more because I just want to
highlight for everyone exactly what's
being said here so because you need a
continuous supply of power and that's
particularly true in the winter or
perhaps when it's extremely hot you need
a continuous supply of power and you
also need a continuous supply of power
that's capable of being reliable during
Peak usage hours
so because wind and solar cannot do that
and we don't have the storage in in to
use wind and solar we have to have two
parallel Power Systems and so I can't
see how anybody can think that's a good
idea now that's especially the case when
if you produce two parallel Power
Systems you make
energy much more expensive but also you
you introduce
unpredictabilities into the fossil fuel
or coal or nuclear end of the equation
because it isn't obvious to the people
who are investing in those Technologies
exactly how much attention is going to
be paid to their needs and so
you complicate the you complicate the
economic infrastructure upon which the
provision of reliable fossil fuel and
nuclear has already been predicated and
so you're going to have to also trigger
the economic incentives because that
backup system is going to sit idle yeah
a good fraction of the time and but
you're still paying the capital expense
somebody took out a loan to build that
gas plant with ccs and how are you going
to compensate them when they're only
being used 10 percent of the time or
less Okay so I I think you could make a
radical case that switching to
Renewables under such a situation if the
Renewables are wind and solar is just
ill-advised period because of the
problem of having to double the energy
uh infrastructure system yeah yeah yeah
okay and so so there's another there's
another problem and that's the critical
materials problem you mentioned Cobalt I
think a little bit uh uh a while ago the
renewable Technologies for their magnets
for other components the wiring use a
tremendous amount more of non exotic I'm
sorry of exotic materials rare Earths
Cobalt nickel copper not so exotic but
very important and the world does not
have the capacity to produce those
materials at the scale and cost that's
required
okay so now let's let's talk about let's
talk about costs so
from what I'm able to understand and
this is fairly basic is that
because energy sits at the base of
everything we do because there's no
difference in some real sense between
energy and work and there's no
difference between work and even minimal
human flourishing shelter opportunity
for your kids provision of inexpensive
and plentiful food you know the
fundamental Basics every time we make
energy more expensive what we do is we
tilt hundreds of millions of people who
are just starting to struggle their way
out of absolute poverty right back into
what desperate scrabbling around in the
dirt fundamentally and so and then you
might say well that's absolutely
necessary because of limits to growth we
the planet just can't tolerate the the
multitude of people striving for
Economic Security that are are currently
engaged in that struggle and so tough
luck to those people but the thing the
thing that really bothers me about that
apart from the fact that it's cruel
beyond belief is that I don't see any
evidence at all that tipping hundreds of
millions of people back into absolute
poverty is going to do anything but make
the planet a hell of a lot worse I mean
the the situation in Germany is quite
illustrative of that now because we've
got a perfect storm in Germany as far as
I can tell we've got dependence on a
dictator Putin or on Petro dictators
because Germany for example has just
made a big deal with Qatar because
Canada set them away empty-handed and
then energy costs are extremely
expensive in Germany and so lots of
Industrial Enterprises are leaving going
to places like China and the U.S and
then also the entire power structure is
now incredibly unreliable and it's more
polluting by a large margin than it was
15 years ago yeah all true okay which is
incredible for a uh you know credible
for a country that is founded on
rationality and sensible engineering and
invented many of the technologies that
are used in a modern fossil also fuel
based Energy System nuclear fission was
discovered in Germany right this is
crazy I think you know Mrs Merkel uh is
at the heart of a lot of those decisions
she is a trained scientist she's a
physical chemist I I know from talking
to people who have talked with her she
understood all of this but was beholden
to the electorate and made the decision
uh based on uh politics rather than what
she knew yeah well you know about energy
technique yeah I don't even think that
this is based on politics per se you
know I think what happens to these
leaders and I've I've seen a fair bit of
this in Canada and I know about it
firsthand and in the U.S for that matter
is that
people get inflamed about a particular
issue because they're afraid let's say
climate change and then the politicians
who have very little courage on the
Electoral front use very very badly
designed public opinion polls to sample
people's Terror at the level of whim and
then they Pander to it and I don't
actually don't think that that's
necessary because I don't think there's
any evidence at all that that kind of
public opinion poll driven pandering is
a reasonable short medium or long-term
political solution so it's actually
quite a mystery to me you know go ahead
go ahead
I I was going to say in these issues at
least for climate and Industry there are
underlying scientific and
techno-economic realities
and you cannot violate them without
running into big trouble and Germany is
a wonderful example where they just
ignored the technical economic realities
the same is true of the climate uh story
where some combination of some of the
scientists the media the politicians and
the ngos have quite unreasonably
hyped the alleged climate threat both
climate and energy are complicated
nuanced subjects they can't be distilled
down into sound bites what we do
involves trade-offs and the politicians
will not let the public be informed
enough about those trade-offs to make a
a decision yeah well some of that's some
of that's a problem it really is in part
a problem of complexity right I mean
because you can imagine that there's
there's an attraction to
relatively simple
hypotheses and maybe that's a good one
that's Occam's razor in some sense
although you don't want your
explanations to be any simpler than they
need to be and so we have well it's
reasonable to be concerned about the
environment part of the environment is
climate part of climate is carbon
dioxide maybe we should just focus on
carbon dioxide and then we're doing the
right thing and that's where people get
LED down the Garden Path because you
don't get to be a planetary Savior by
jumping up and down and saying carbon
dioxide is bad
like it it that's too oversimplified and
the politicians capitalize on that right
so so let me give you one simple
response to that which I found to be
pretty effective uh and I would credit
Alex Epstein free in general thought
right and whom I know you've you've
spoken with there are one and a half
billion of us in the developed world uh
US Canada EU Japan and so on and we
enjoy abundant energy uh it's a little
more expensive at the moment because of
Market issues but by and large we've got
a great deal of energy and it's gives
lets us live the kind of lives we live
there are six and a half billion people
on the planet who don't have that energy
and as they develop as they improve
their lives their energy demand is going
to grow
and the only way
sorry not the only way but the most
effective way to let them have that
energy is by fossil fuels
electricity gas coal uh Transportation
oil and I think Alex very effectively
argues that it is immoral to deny them
the opportunity to develop with adequate
energy yeah well we can I think I've
heard of an adequate response I would
push that past unethical into the realm
of murderous I think it's absolutely
unforgivable for the West to ever say
anything about whether or not the
developing countries and that would
include China and India have any right
to start moving away from wood and dung
which also kill many many people while
they're burning toward coal and natural
gas and nuclear and then and I've not
heard any leader address that issue
directly I'd love to ask John Kerry or
you know your Your Leader uh Trudeau or
are the people in the EU where is your
morality about these six and a half
billion people well there is no good
answer well this is the argument as far
as I can understand it and I I've been
trying to follow along let's say on the
psychological front trying to piece this
together it's something like
pay now or pay later sure many many
people are going to suffer
if we raise Energy prices and put on
limits to growth but that will be
nothing compared to the suffering of
people 50 to 100 years down the road if
we don't take emergency action now
so that's nonsense okay nonsense okay
why that's not what the science says
okay let me start with again something
pretty simple let's look at the last 120
years
since 1900
to now the globe has warned about 1.3
degrees Celsius
in that time we've seen the greatest
Improvement in human betterment we've
ever seen the population has gone up by
a factor of five
in that 120 years the GDP per capita has
gone up by a factor of seven longevity
increased from 32 years to the current
72 years across the globe literacy
fraction has gone up enormously fraction
and extreme poverty has gone down and so
on even as the globe warmed another 1.3
degrees
now the ipcc projects best guess right
now uh about another 1.3 degrees of
warming in the next hundred years
think
that that additional warming is going to
reverse or even significantly derail the
progress we've had it's just nonsense
okay and in fact the ipcc reports say
that at least on the economic front a
few degrees of warming is a few percent
hit on the GDP which will increase
anyway substantially over the next yes
yes so instead of going up by 400
percent it'll go up 385 right something
right which is within the uncertainty
well within the uncertainty prediction
so the notion of a climate catastrophe
is just nonsense okay so I'm gonna I'm
gonna put says it right there in the
reports okay I'm gonna push you on that
and I'm gonna try to take the the
hypothetical alternative scientific
perspective so back
I guess it was a hundred years ago 150
years ago something like that Thomas
Malthus wrote his famous uh essay on
um population and Extinction in some
real sense and so for all those of you
who are listening you need to know this
idea so Malthus who was quite a smart
Observer noted that in natural
populations there are often cycles of
boom and bust and so under standard
natural conditions a population of
animals and that would range anywhere
from single-celled animals say an impetu
dish up to Deer you know grazing on the
planes a population would expand until
it consumed all of the available
resources that would be mostly food in
the case of animals and then having
over-consumed would precipitously
collapse and that's balanced in the
natural world to some degree by
predation and the inter community and
Inter what would you say competition in
between different species but
fundamental species yeah right but
fundamentally given limited resources a
given population will expand until it
exceeds the carrying capacity of the
environment now malthusian biologists
assumed that that model was relevant to
human beings by assuming that we were
subject to the same constraints and so
you really saw this kicking into high
gear in the 1960s where people like Paul
Ehrlich who has plenty of sins on his
conscience let's say made the case in
the mid 60s along with the club of Rome
that by the year 2000 we'd have so many
bloody mouths to feed on the planet that
commodity prices would shoot through the
roof and everyone would start I remember
reading as you probably did the limits
to growth right the Forester uh book
right right and the times we know now
yes well in the time frame well the time
frame prediction was the year 2000 now
one of the things we should point out
that if you're putting forward a
scientific hypoth Services that's
testable and and falsifiable it's
incumbent upon you to specify the
appropriate time frame you don't of
course to say the human race is heading
for uh an uncontrollable malthusian
catastrophe
sometime in the next 10 000 years it's
like you you can just go away with those
ideas if you can't specify the damn time
frame right then you should shut the
hell up verifiable testable hypotheses
are the essence of science right so
absolutely so okay so people like Eric
who predicted for example that commodity
prices were going to spike through the
roof by the year 2000 and everyone was
going to starve are wrong and the reason
they're wrong at least in part is
because the malthusian predictions they
don't apply to people and I think the
reason they don't apply in some
fundamental sense is because we're
capable of the death of our ideas
instead of the death of our bodies right
so we can adapt to yeah adaptability is
maybe the defining characteristic of
humans all right we are wonderfully
adaptive people live you know from
Hudson Bay down to the equator and we do
just fine uh and I think one at least to
judge by past experience you have to
have faith that we as a species will
figure it out because we've always done
that in the past yeah we've done it
under more uh trying conditions than we
have now I might say absolutely you know
and there's absolutely there's a lot of
brain power available in the world now
too and that's one of the massive
benefits of having a larger population I
mean there's more smart people alive now
especially smart and educated people
than there has been at any point in the
past and and we've got to let them you
know do their thing all right and that's
got to do with governance and Regulation
and so on but absolutely there's
tremendous human capacity right now okay
now the ipcc why don't you explain
exactly what that is and also tell
everyone because all the climate
doomsters hypothetically predicate their
propositions on the ipcc reports which
and they're they're regarded by as gold
standard people like Bjorn lomberg also
accept the ipcc prognostication but have
pointed out like Epstein and you have
pointed out too that well it's one thing
to read the ipcc report and then it's
another to read the summary and then the
summary of the summary which is mostly
what people read and it starts to become
non-scientific and political or
theological as it gets condensed so what
do you think the ipcc reports actually
say apart from the fact that we're
looking at about a 1.3 degree increase
in average temperature in the next
hundred years
yeah so we we do see we have seen in the
past an increase in the Earth's
temperature the ipcc will say that's
consistent with it all being driven by
human influences but they allow for the
possibility that there's natural
variation in there so that's just on the
temperature what they say about extreme
weather events is that apart from things
directly associated with the temperature
like
record high temperatures or heat waves
um You Don't See Much Trends globally
there's you know uh drought uh hard to
see a trend hurricanes or tropical
Cyclones hard to see any Trend at all
over a century maybe there's a little
thing we can talk about afterward uh sea
level rise uh proceeding at the rate of
one foot a century globally different
locally we can talk about that a little
bit if you want mid-latitude severe
storms and so on not much going on at
all it's hard to find Trends doesn't
mean that the trends aren't there but
they've just not emerged from the data
okay so I wanted yeah sorry go ahead I
was going to talk a little bit about the
IPS please do so this this is an
exercise carried out by the UN roughly
every six or seven years
they convene a thousand scientists from
countries around the globe
who are supposed to survey assess the
scientific understanding of
human-induced climate change that's
really important because they focus on
you know what might be attributable to
humans as opposed to Natural climate
change which is uh an important part of
the story and so they split up into
various working groups write very
detailed thousand two thousand Page Long
reports that actually in my opinion do a
pretty good job of assessing the science
those reports are then
packaged if you like or summarized into
summaries for policy makers where the
scientists don't have as much of a hand
in writing those summaries the
governments intervene quite a bit
and when you compare the summaries which
is what serious people would read if
they're not climate scientists so what's
actually in the reports there's lots of
Disconnect and I can give you some
examples at some point and then of
course you get the media where you have
journalists who don't know very much at
all about the science they're on a
climate beat in the newspaper and so
they have to provide climate stories
that catch the attention and then you've
got the politicians who grab on to all
of this and so at the end of this long
game of telephone what comes through is
very little reflective of what the
actual science says all right so okay so
now you hear very frequently that
97 of scientists agree that well global
warming exists or climate change exists
but my understanding of that is the
following and so correct me if I'm wrong
so 97 of scientists agree that there is
credible evidence that some some
proportion of the current Trend towards
warming is a attributable to human
activity and more specifically to carbon
dioxide so be some fraction of the 1.3
degrees that have yeah right right
whether it's a half or whether it's
whole I think people would disagree on
right right and there's some
disagreement about exactly the range of
hypothetical temperature increase over
the last 100 years or the next hundred
okay so that's the 97 what percentage of
scientists do you suppose actually take
an apocalyptic view specifically in
relationship to carbon dioxide yeah do
you have any idea a sense of that out no
you know no I'm and you know the 97
numbers a made-up number also yeah
entirely flawed study I think you know
the scientists are not behaving as
though it were a pop apocalyptic uh I
would say 95 of them are not in that
camp but look that's just
my anecdotal perception
um you know I'd say it's hard to imagine
folks a lot yeah right and you know none
of them are kind of jumping off the roof
and and
um saying my God uh we'd better do
something or we're headed for uh climate
Hell highway climate Highway to Hell or
something is what the Secretary General
of the UN said a couple months ago right
well so then no we're not okay well this
is it's an issue it's a long-term
problem we can deal with it uh but
there's no reason to uh ring alarm Bells
okay well then I I'm gonna play Devil's
Advocate from another direction for a
moment so I would say of all the data
points that I've encountered over the
last 15 years investigating the Nexus
between energy and environment the data
point that's left out at me most
strongly is the fact that oh since the
year 2000
the world has greened by 15 and
primarily in semi-arid areas so let's
just walk through that for a second so
15 is a lot it's bigger than the entire
land mass of the United States and green
is a lot different than brown or dead
and semi-arid means that plants are
growing in places that are damn near
deserts and as far as I can tell that's
pretty much the opposite of what the
climate apocalypse
um prognosticated and more than that I
can't shake the suspicion and I would
love to be corrected on this if you can
see somewhere that I'm wrong why the
hell isn't that good news especially
when it's also allied with the fact that
our crops are much more productive as a
consequence too so I could say hey look
at this it turns out that there's no
more effective way of delivering
fertilizer for plants worldwide than to
burn fossil fuels yeah so so let's back
up on the science for a second first so
plants love CO2 right we pump CO2 into
greenhouses in order to get the plants
to grow better right now in the
atmosphere the concentration is about
420 parts per million of CO2 we raise it
to over a thousand parts per million in
greenhouses to help the plants grow the
CO2 not only lets them grow faster but
it lets them use water more information
right they don't have to open up the
stomata and lose water as much uh you're
15 uh since 2000 uh if you'd ask me I
would have said it's more like 40
percent since the 1980s all right so
yeah things are growing better on Earth
since 1980 wow right something called
The Leaf area index has gone up you NASA
produces maps that show this they write
press releases that show this but
somehow it's not really present in the
media okay so so how's how come we're
not how come we can't take the stance
that carbon dioxide is a net good
because that's such a developing
statistic 40 since the 1980s I mean I
don't know of another set of data that
has well let's call that that scale
right that's really something and green
that's that's important right and if you
look at the agricultural yields and so
on whether it's in the U.S or India has
been going gangbusters on producing
crops
um you know this is certainly one of the
benefits uh and it's a significant one
that has to be weighed against
hypothetical uh detrimental uh effects
from global warming and the net of them
is a few percent again it's in the noise
you can't distinguish it there are other
factors about human well-being that are
much more important than whether the
climate's changing or not so you know if
I were to be a little snarky
it's almost a nothing Burger the science
says that if you read the reports
um but uh the detrimental effects get
hyped up by various players
if you own a small to medium-sized
business that kept employees on payroll
through covid you may have a big cash
refund waiting for you the employee
retention credit is a tax credit of up
to twenty six thousand dollars per
employee right now more businesses than
ever qualify the experts at
refundspro.com can help you cut through
the red tape and qualify for this
government program most of their refunds
are over one hundred thousand dollars
even businesses that have received PPP
funds may be eligible and there are
absolutely no fees unless you receive a
refund there's no reason not to apply if
your business experience shutdowns
limited capacity supply chain challenges
or reduced Revenue due to covid you
likely qualify
refundspro.com has already helped
hundreds of businesses don't lose the
refund you're owed by missing the
deadline get started today with a free
five-minute questionnaire at
refundspro.com that's refunds with an s
pro.com
the other thing that I've seen the drum
being beat about quite uh assiduously
let's say in recent years and maybe I
don't know how much you know about this
I don't know enough about it uh that's
for sure
there are people who are claiming now
and maybe this is because some of the
shine has gone off the climate
um apocalypse that we're headed for a
mass extinction and I read a couple of
computer models the other day that were
published saying that there's a like a
domino effect with regards to mass
extinction and I mean there are a lot of
people and although there's a lot of
greenery now and there's more forest in
the northern hemisphere so you know
those are powerful countervailing
proclivities but do you have do you have
any specific knowledge
about about our effects on the mass
extinction front yeah no no you know
like a senior academic as you and I are
you're reluctant to talk about things
you don't know much about
um and I'm very careful about that
um I don't know about the projections
you're talking about but I'm our priori
very suspicious because these are
complicated physical biological systems
and small effects can have a big
influence and so I'm skeptical if I were
to look at those papers one of the first
things I would ask is how well have you
reproduced the past Because unless you
can reproduce the dominant changes that
we've seen over the last 100 years
Thousand Years whatever
um I don't have much confidence in your
ability to predict well okay let's talk
about models some more so one of the
things I want to point out to people and
you tell me what you think about this is
that it is perfectly possible to produce
pretty damn good
computer models that predict the
behavior of the stock market in the past
and the stock market's very complex of
course because it's an index of well the
sum total of human economic activity
plus political activity so it's a very
dynamic system and it's full of weird
feedback loops because as soon as you
can predict it you perturb the system
but in any case here's the fundamental
point it doesn't appear to me at all
that the stock market is more complex
than the climate and if you could
produce a model that could predict the
climate then you could produce predict
produce a model that would predict the
stock market and if you could produce
that model even if you only got were
right 51 percent of the time
consistently you would soon have all the
money and I don't see anybody who's
developing these very complex models who
has all the money so I don't think that
they can make models that are that can
model the behavior of systems that
complex and so let's talk about models a
bit so so let's talk about models a
little bit let me back up again and talk
about some of the basics
um the most used models for the climate
system or what are called General
circulation models
they cut the atmosphere and the ocean up
into cubes about a hundred kilometers on
a side 60 miles on a side and going up
20 layers in the atmosphere and then 20
layers down in the ocean
and we have a difference to the stock
market is we have some underlying
physical laws the laws of conservation
of energy Mass momentum and so on that
govern how the air the radiation both
sunlight and heat radiation water vapor
flow through these boxes Newton
understood those or Euler back in the
19th century or even earlier and we can
build such models and use computers so
you wind up with a a voted 10 million
boxes covering the the earth going up
and down in the ocean the atmosphere and
then you follow the flow of stuff
through these boxes every 10 minutes
10 minute time steps and you do that for
a century or so and you got some
description of what you think is the
climate but there are lots of problems
with that
one is that 60 miles on a side yeah is
not sufficient uh to describe the
difference in climate between New York
and Washington DC or New York and
Toronto for example so that's one
and so the second is a lot of phenomena
happen on much smaller sizes think about
thunderheads for example okay they
happen on a few mile scale so you have
to make up some assumption about what's
going on inside each of these boxes and
different people make different
assumptions
a third is that the boxes are not really
Cubes but they're pancakes because the
atmosphere is really thin compared to
the size of the Earth and the ocean is
also pretty thin and so you have to make
up assumptions about how things move
vertically that are not directly tied to
the fundamental physical laws
so all of those you know make a lot of
trouble and that's why the world has 50
different such models and to get
predictions they average all of them
together okay so so let's take that
apart just so everyone understands so
the first is is these models are not
very high resolution either spatially or
temporally so you have to use huge cubes
plus you're only temporary temporary
well temporary is pretty good 10 minutes
uh well uh spatially right right but
it's terrible but we also well perhaps
perhaps on the temporal side I mean the
thing is is we're looking at relatively
small deviations in temperature right if
it's one degree over a century this is
not a huge effect and what that means is
that the models aren't high resolution
enough to be accurate to that scale
they're simply not that's true that's
true now that doesn't okay that doesn't
mean we shouldn't model because
our models get better and better all the
time but there's a big difference
between modeling something even if you
can make it accurate to predict the past
and being able to model the present but
there's a walloping difference between
being able to model the present and
being able to model climate a hundred
years from now because the air is
compound as you predicted out into the
future well yes um that's certainly true
although you hope to be describing
averages that are reasonably well
predicted you know there's several
comments about that one is
um you know on this human influences are
small they're as you say a one percent
effect we're concerned about a rise of
two degrees was the Earth's surface
temperature is about 300 degrees so it's
like a one percent effect the second is
we're interested not in describing the
climate but in describing how the
climate responds to those influences
that's the big question and that's a
order of magnitude harder job than
describing the climate itself
the third thing is we're looking over
time scales of 100 150 years and we have
terrible data to describe what happened
in the past
yes we have reasonable confidence about
the average global temperature but what
goes on in the oceans which is really
where climate happens the oceans are the
long-term component of the system we
have terrible data until about 20 years
ago when we started putting out floats
of various kinds well how good is the
ocean data I mean the ocean's pretty
damn deep and it's not it's not like we
can measure everything that's happening
in the ocean I can't imagine we
understand
long-term current flows from the depths
well enough to be predicting climate
alteration on the scale of a few degrees
that just strikes me as a unbelievably
preposterous
right studies that have attempted to
reproduce the warming of the ocean
show that the ocean was warming at about
half the current rate even as the little
Ice Age started to end and and so
untangling this long-term natural
variability from the effect of human
influence which has only really been
significant for the last 70 or 80 years
or so is a very very difficult problem
maybe the central problem in climate
Okay now you talked about when you were
at BP you you got somewhat excited about
the possibility of biofuel we didn't
really continue down that road
um what do you what what are your
thoughts on the nuclear front let's say
and and did you see developments there
that you regarded as like with a lot of
people talk about modular nuclear power
for example language so so right so full
disclosure first you know I I began Life
as a nuclear physicist right and so the
atom is my friend uh I'm I'm a scientist
not an engineer I don't think I could
build a critical credible nuclear
reactor but I certainly understand how
they work in great detail and understand
the economics and the business and so on
I think if the world is serious about
reducing carbon dioxide emissions
nuclear power has to be a big part of
the future
essentially zero emissions reasonably
economic and a demonstrate a
demonstrated technology right roughly 20
percent of U.S electricity comes from
fission uh 80 percent of French
electricity comes from fission maybe
it's 75 now so you know we know how to
do this
the problem is that the big ones
particularly in the US the existing
power plants of which there are about 90
something now uh in the U.S
um are um
um
very expensive you have to put down a
lot of money at the beginning
10 20 billion dollars and then you don't
start to pay it off until 30 years hence
when you sell the electricity that
you've been making and so you need a
stable and sensible regulatory
environment for these big Capital
expenses well look I mean we were
building nuclear power plants you know
60 years ago and so we should be better
at it now especially at the modular
level so one of the things I'm curious
about well too I suppose is to what
degree does insane regulation make
nuclear power unbelievably expensive and
then the second question would be given
that insane regulation does make nuclear
power extremely expensive do you think
there's any possibility at all
practically speaking that that red tape
could be reversed I mean Germany just
built an LNG port in like five months so
you know what it's obvious we can get
our act together when we need we can do
this yeah yeah I think you know
regulation has been a big part of why
big nuclear is expensive I'm I'm all for
making sure these things are safe we
have to do that that's the primary
consideration and the industry believes
that as well
the problem is that in the U.S we have
built every reactor custom built they're
all different right even if the names
are more of us the same in detail
they're different the hope is with small
modular reactors is to focus the
regulation so that you can get one
design approved and then you can make a
hundred of them right and ship them
around the country you build them in a
factory and you put them on a flatbed uh
rail car and bring them to the site it
would also ease the economics because
you pay for the first one and then you
use the cash flow from it to finance the
second one and the third one and so on
at a site yeah well Rolls Royce is doing
that they've got a proposal so Rolls
Royce is doing that might make right so
so in the U.S uh there are two companies
I remember the name of one of them
called new scale and I think they hope
to have the first one in the ground
within the next five or six years
um you know you got to come down the
learning curve right now the costs are
more expensive than big nuclear per
kilowatt hour produced but as they come
down the learning curve and build more
of these and so on
um the costs should come down they'll
still be more expensive than gas uh for
example to make electricity but at least
you won't have the CO2 issues the waste
issue which people talk about also with
respect to nuclear is a technically
solved problem okay how how is it solved
monitored retrieve retrievable storage
you put it underground you monitor it
the waste decays uh the heat uh from the
waste decays
um after 100 years uh it's almost all
gone and then you can pull it back out
if you needed the energy in it you know
we only burn about five percent of the
uranium in the in the waste that that's
there in the uh waste and so it's
soluble so okay I started looking into
the sorts of things we're talking about
about 10 years ago and maybe 15 years
ago okay so one of the things that
really shocked me
well there are two things the first was
that when I started looking into the
energy and environment Nexus in detail I
got more optimistic rather than less and
I thought oh my God things are a lot
better than I thought they were people
are getting richer at a stunning rate it
looks like there's a positive
relationship between population growth
and wealth the planet is cleaner and
better off in many ways than it's been
for a very long time like there's real
reasons for optimism and uh
and then I also so that was shocking
then I also learned and this was also
shocking that
there's a very positive relationship
between GDP and environmental let's call
it awareness and concern so it looks
like once you get people up to about the
point where in their country the average
GDP is five thousand dollars per person
people can stop scrabbling around in the
dirt and burning everything and eating
everything in sight and they can start
to think about what sort of environment
they'd like to have for their children
the the technical name is the kuznets
curve which you probably right right
right right right and and so and so then
I thought oh well isn't this interesting
what this should mean is that if we
wanted to we could work really hard
internationally to make energy cheap and
we could pull billions of people the
remaining people in the world out of
abject poverty and the consequence of
that they would be that they would start
to become locally concerned about
environmental maintainability and
sustainability and then everyone would
have enough to eat and they'd all be
educated plus the planet would be better
off and then the question was okay and
here's a here's a question that we can
really delve into why the hell aren't we
doing this it's like instead we're
buying this crazy apocalyptic narrative
that's making the planet worse that's
driving energy costs up that's
destabilizing us sociopolitically when
as far as I can tell the pathway forward
to abundance and sustainability is
pretty damn obvious and also not
particularly expensive so what the
hell's going on
so so I walk I quote two folks relevant
to this one is H.L Menken uh who was a
journalist writing in the early part of
the 20th century in New York us very
astute very acerbic and he's got a line
in one of his books which I'll try to
reproduce the purpose of practical
politics is to keep the electorate
alarmed by a series of mostly imaginary
hobgoblins so that they can be clamoring
to be led to safety
and you see the politicians grabbing on
to these issues whether it's the climate
whether it's immigration they do it on
both sides right all sides the missile
Gap in the 60s you know whatever the
truth was Behind These the politicians
amp it up in order to get the electorate
to actually do something right so that's
one quote the second is there was this
guy named Anthony Downs who was an
economist working in the 60s through the
90s or 2000s he was uh first at UCLA and
then at Brookings so he's quite on the
left had a number of uh insights to his
credit but one of them was what he calls
the issue attention cycle namely some
issue whether it's pesticides or climate
bubbles among the experts for a while
nobody pays much attention to it it
suddenly bursts into the public
consciousness uh and everybody gets both
alarmed but also enthusiastic about the
ease with which they're going to solve
it then everybody discovers boy this is
going to be really hard to solve and
eventually the issue Fades with time or
morphs into something else yeah and I
think we are at kind of that third phase
now with the climate where everybody is
really arising just how hard and I would
say almost impossible it's going to be
to reduce emissions uh certainly Net
Zero by the end of the century looks
like it's just not going to happen so so
you know so I think that's what's going
on well I'm going to add some
psychological layering to that you can
tell me what you think of this well so
first of all people are tilted towards
attention paid to negative events and so
for example people are much more hurt by
a loss of five dollars than they are
made Happy by a gain of five dollars so
we're quite low now I think the reason
we're lost sensitive is that well you
can only be so happy but you can be 100
dead and so being more sensitive and
threat
in in terms of magnitude of response per
unit of reinforcement makes sense given
that we're finite and vulnerable and
then we also have the problem that
any given threat
almost any given threat could in
principle be personally and socially
apocalyptic so for example
it it could be the case that the aches
and pains that you're experiencing today
are the ground zero for an epidemic
that'll kill one third of the United
States right I mean it's very unlikely
but it happened with the black death and
I mean the the possibility of an
apocalyptic outcome is always non-zero
and in fact in in personal life it's
always a hundred percent because the
worst thing that could possibly happen
to you will for sure happen to you and
so it will eventually happen well right
and so I think one of our problems is is
that because we're sensitive to negative
information and because there's always a
potential apocalypse bubbling away in
the background it's very hard for us to
distinguish collectively between threats
that are valid apocalyptically and those
that aren't and then we tend to err on
the side of of panic let's say and that
wasn't such a bad thing when our
responses weren't as large as the
potential problems because now now what
happens is that if we Stampede in one
direction we're so powerful that the
bloody Stampede can be much worse than
the problem
we'll be back in one moment first we
wanted to give you a sneak peek at
Jordan's new series Exodus
so the Hebrews created history as we
know it
you don't get away with anything and so
you might think you can bend the fabric
of reality and that you can treat people
instrumentally and that you can bow to
the Tyrant and violate your conscience
without cost you will pay the piper it's
going to call you out of that slavery
into Freedom even if that pulls you into
the desert
and we're going to see that there's
something else going on here that is far
more Cosmic and deeper than what you can
imagine the highest
[Music]
Spirit to which we're beholden is
presented precisely as that spirit that
allies itself with the cause of Freedom
against tyranny
I want villains to get punished but do
you want the villains to learn before
they have to pay the ultimate price
that's such a Christian question
you know Bill nordhaus uh won a Nobel
prize in economics in 2018 I think for
one of the things he wanted for was the
realization that there's an optimal way
in which to decarbonize
if you do it too rapidly it's too
disruptive and you deploy immature
technology you do it too slowly carbon
dioxide builds up and propose promotes a
greater risk so I think people need this
kind of multi-decade if not Century
perspective on making these changes but
also going back in time the realization
that we have managed much worse threats
and crises and uh as Bjorn Lombard says
we should cool it a bit relax think it
through uh and do it in a deliberate
yeah well we're also we're also not that
good
particularly now at adopting say a few
centuries-long time frame and it's not
surprising because we don't live that
long but I mean if you look in at
Medieval Europe there was the capacity
for sustained imagination so a lot of
the great Cathedrals which were amazing
engineering projects for their time were
construed over uh multiple centuries
people who started them knew they
wouldn't finish them so there was that
sense of of of long-term continuity but
maybe one of the byproducts of a very
efficient and Hyper productive
capitalist Society is that we tend to
have a shorter time frame for
expectation of results you know and
there's obviously benefits to that right
because why the hell not fix the problem
in the next quarter if you can but
there's going to be some issues that
require a time scale of centuries I mean
I think the Bible you know go ahead
please
no we we have you know been uh seduced
perhaps by the digital Revolution where
the Technologies change every couple
years right I mean you know if you go
back a decade or two we were using
eight-track tapes and so on and now of
course it's all uh MP3s or MP4s or
whatever
um energy is very different
the systems need to work as a system
the facilities last decades and we
demand High reliability so energy
changes on multi-decade time scales it
doesn't change every year or two and
people have they have come to expect
that things can change rapidly when in
fact they're a good physical and
economic reasons why energy cannot
change right well so that's a complex
cognitive problem too right to be able
to distinguish between those problems
that are amenable to Rapid solution and
those problems that aren't that's not a
trivial cognitive exercise it's not
obviously especially if you don't have
specialized knowledge
right or if you don't have experience I
mean not to knock the younger generation
I have three kids myself and you know
they're all wonderful people but if
you're a 22 year old just having
graduated uh from undergraduate uh
education you don't have the perspective
I certainly didn't uh and getting this
perspective through life experience
through Reading More and understanding
more about the world uh gives you a
different view of these things some
people say that you know you and I will
not be around to see the worst
consequences of climate change but we
have seen the world navigate far more
difficult yes yes and and to do it
successfully not without pain and and
turmoil but um we will persist as a
species well yes and I mean I would say
that things have turned out quite a lot
better than I presumed they would when I
was young I mean for and how old you Dr
coonan I'm 71. okay so you're about
you're 11 years older than me so you
know both of us grew up in the Cold War
area era and I would say our apocalypse
was probably nuclear
and it seems to me that we had more
reason to assume that the nuclear threat
was a genuine apocalyptic nightmare than
the climate apocalypse have now given
what happened in the Cuban Missile
Crisis and then again in the 1980s we
were damn close a couple of times and we
might be on the threshold now with
regards to this war with Russia so who
who the hell knows right but but it was
certainly the case that among people
um in in my generation there were a
substantial number of young people who
were seriously affected enough
psychologically by the ever-present
threat of nuclear war let's say to be
very demoralized and disenchanted about
the future to think well why the hell
bothered because the probability we're
going to end up in a nuclear winter is
so high that it's just pointless to do
anything and and then there was the you
know usual murmurings in the background
about overpopulation and so forth and
coming scarcity and and all of that and
then really what's happened since then
is that
pretty much everything globally has got
way better than anybody could have
possibly imagined right there's
absolutely yeah yeah and very surprising
ways is so not only is the planet
Greener but it's much better fed and
obesity is a way bigger problem than
starvation except and starvation almost
never occurs except for political
reasons and I mean distribution issues
yeah exactly exactly and so you know all
things literacy has gone up
communications Mobility uh Health
longevity I mean as I said over 120
years the world has improved like it has
never improved uh before
yeah so then we have and and I mean it's
not like we're getting stupider and I'm
a bit concerned on the AI front you know
but so far the additional computational
resources we've been able to put at our
disposal have been used in a fairly
intelligent way I mean China is kind of
worrisome on the totalitarian front and
yeah but it isn't obvious to me that
China is going to be particularly
successful in their totalitarian
Ambitions the Chinese themselves seem to
be getting pretty damn sick of having
the state interfere with absolutely
everything you do every second of their
lives so I could easily see China
undergoing a collapse that something
akin to what happened to the Soviet
Union in 1989 that system is just too
damn unwieldy and right you know right
you see these people in Iran clamoring
away for freedom and so you know maybe
we'll see a positive development on that
front that might be nice and so I just
don't see any okay first of all I don't
see any reason for an apocalyptic
Outlook we could we could make things a
hell of a lot better than they are now
very very with absolutely now who do you
see operating at the international level
on the leadership front that you regard
as or do you see anyone that you regard
as a credible advocate
for like a sensible Nexus of environment
and energy policies
you know uh it's very tough to find that
because if you speak out against the
prevailing catastrophe narrative uh you
get shouted down
and you get no traction at all but what
I do think is that again there are
techno economic realities
that will eventually uh cause the system
to do the right thing I talk in private
to leaders of energy companies to
politicians Finance folks and I think if
you and I were having that conversation
with them in private uh there wouldn't
be too much disagreement
but many of these leaders feel
captive or beholden not to shareholders
but to stakeholders and they dare not
say yeah well anything you know is a lot
of that is off the narrative a lot of
that's just straight outright cowardice
in Miami I've lost I mean you you've
been you've been uh you know I mean you
wrote this book unsettled and people
went after you but look at you you're
alive you seem to be thriving your book
was quite successful I mean how did you
escape the the the apocalyptic
consequences of council culture like how
did you know
I I think one of the
um
foundations of the book or one of the
principles when I wrote it is that I
would only use material that was out of
the ipcc reports or the quality research
literature or the primary data itself in
other words I wasn't making anything up
it's all traceable back to those uh gold
standard sources and so people can
accuse me as the have of cherry picking
or not telling the whole story of course
I have responses to all of that uh but
by and large they have a very hard time
criticizing what I've written they can
criticize me show for the oil industry
uh not a climate scientist a denier etc
etc but by and large
um I've only gotten very positive
reactions from other people who've
actually read the book I mean I can tell
you stories about some of the nonsense
criticisms yeah yeah but but I mean
you've been able to do this and you know
you haven't been like hung and drawn and
quartered by the horrible mob I know
it's I know that being mob can be very
unpleasant and I I meant I know many
people who've been canceled and it's a
life-changing experience so I'm not
trying to minimize that but you'd hope
that there would be a modicum of Courage
on the political front so that some
people could come out and say well you
know we don't really need to go down
this idiot limits to growth uh root that
we've been pursuing expensively and
counterproductively for 60 years we
could just do what we could to make
energy more abundant and cleaner and
cheaper for poor people and we could
raise their we could raise their sights
to the Future and as as the measures
that governments are implementing to try
to get to that unattainable future
whether it's bans on internal combustion
engines or increased Renewables that are
going to make the grid expensive and
unreliable eventually people will be
impacted directly and they'll be mad
because it's not being done in a
graceful or thoughtful way and I think
people will then say why are we doing
all this again you know the U.S is only
13 percent of global emissions
and if the U.S went to zero emissions
tomorrow
it would be negated by a decade's worth
of growth in the rest of the world
and so you know the best thing the US
can do is develop Technologies right to
to try to get there and not make massive
changes itself well it's also the case
that the U.S did lower its carbon output
by a substantial amount and the reason
for that was fracking which is not
something that the environmental
apocalypse would have predicted in fact
quite the course that's that that's the
major reason the substitution of gas for
coal but another reason is that the
Renewables have grown in electricity
generation in the U.S I don't know the
exact number now but wind is something
like 13 of U.S electricity generation
it's got reliability issues it's got
land issues it's got materials issues
but um that's another reason emissions
have come down somewhat
right so you're so all things considered
you've remained fundamentally optimistic
you think that's a temperamental
characteristic or do you think that was
driven by by your exploration of the on
the ground realities and then I want to
talk to you too about you know you said
you've been accused of not being a
climate scientist and first of all I
don't think there's such a thing as a
climate scientist right I mean that's
that's not a category that a scientist
falls into you your your basic training
was in physics so maybe we'll return to
that just for a moment what what makes
you a credible Observer on that front
but let's deal with the first issue
first the
uh you know I I think temperamentally
I'm I'm optimistic uh my mother who's
still with us at age 91 uh is was the
youngest by about 15 years of uh for uh
children and she grew up and still has
incredible optimism about things so I
think it's partly in my psychological
DNA but you know it's it's also I I'm
very quantitative I I do numbers and
when you look at the numbers which are
you know somebody once said I think it
was uh Kelvin or Rutherford
um unless you can express it numbers
your knowledge is of the most meager
kind
um and so most people don't do that but
I do and I've dug into the climate
energy story and when you look at the
numbers as I think you said a while ago
it's not so bad
there's no apocalypse
uh in the future
um yes there are issues but we will
navigate them so I I think it is a
combination of both being informed but
also being naturally optimistic right
well that a bit of a tilt towards
optimism is what moves people out into
the world and you know I also don't know
so much if that's properly characterized
as optimism or something characterized
more accurately let's say as useful
faith I mean there are reasons to assume
that things will go to hell in a hand
basket but there's reasons to assume
that we could manage as well as we have
in the past or better and I think that
one of the attributes that tilts us
towards managing well in the future is
the willingness to have some faith in
our ability to adapt and to and to do
the right thing and yeah you know when
we're constantly presenting young people
with the picture of human beings as
destructive Environmental and Cultural
forces we squash that natural faith
which is well yeah there's problems
because being alive is a problem but we
have a host of potential Solutions at
hand and we're not we're not without
resources in the face of our challenges
and and the results
this is the second immoral dimension of
what the current scene looks like not
only are we trying to deny six and a
half billion people uh adequate reliable
affordable energy but we are
particularly in the west depressing the
younger generation in a most
unreasonable way they don't want to have
children they think the world is going
to go to hell in the next 10 years and
so on that's complete nonsense and
somebody needs to stand up and say that
yeah not only do they not want to have
children they don't even want to have
sex I mean we've really demoralized a
whole generation and you know there is
something terribly immoral about that
because my my hypothesis is that if you
think poor people should starve because
energy prices should go up and if you
think that demoralizing young people is
a good way to ensure the long-term
sustainability of the planet you and I
are not on the same side not even a
little bit like I think it's absolutely
reprehensible that we're casting people
back into poverty both in the west
because we're doing that to poor people
who are marginal now but more
importantly in the developing world and
this continued demoralization is
absolutely inexcusable I I would love to
engage with some of the leaders uh John
Kerry Bill Gates
my former friend and colleague Ernie
Moniz who was Secretary of Energy a very
good Secretary of Energy all of whom are
on the more alarmist side of these
things I'd love to have this kind of
conversation with them and ask them
about those two immoral Dimensions it's
very hard to get a serious discussion I
recently have done four debates with
credible people on the other side uh
presented the arguments against rapid
decarbonization and I'm proud to say I
won all four debates we should put those
in the links for to the description
yeah I will send those uh to you so um
the first one was against a climate
scientist from Texas A M Andrew destler
who is much more of a climate scientist
than he is an energy guy and you need
both yeah uh here uh the second debate
was up and probably probably in my view
the best one was against Daniel schrag
who's a professor of Earth Sciences at
Harvard and uh has been and Still
Remains a good friend and colleague the
third was against an energy Economist at
Columbia named gurda Wagner and then the
fourth was again against Andrew descar
who wanted a rematch uh and so these the
problem with talking about this is you
need to understand both the climate
science and the energy inside yeah and
there aren't many people by virtue of my
background I have perhaps been exposed
to both uh in ways that most people have
right right well that's another problem
with regards to let's say public opinion
is that well first of all most people
aren't climate scientists that's for
sure in fact they're a very small
percentage of the population and then as
you pointed out if you add the
additional requirement of having some
expertise on the energy front you're
taking a very small fraction of a very
small fraction of people and maybe you
can count them on
I don't know maybe they're in the maybe
there's under a hundred of them in the
world there just aren't that many and so
you know part of part of this is also
the case that the whole species is
starting to wrestle with problems of a
level of abstraction and a level of
magnitude that are really unforeseen
right and so we don't when I worked for
the UN committees that were working on
the sustainable goals one of the first
things I realized was
oh no one's an expert in sustainable
development that's not an area of
expertise no one knows how to do this
and so we are in some sense casting
around in the dark and part of the
problem with that is we do fall into our
apocalyptic heuristics very very easily
especially if that can be weaponized for
political purposes but it's a little
hard on young people it's a little hard
on poor people
yeah but and so you know you need to
approach these problems with an
inquisitive mind because there are so
many different dimensions and you want
to go out and learn enough about them to
be able to ask the right kind of
questions to the expert yeah well you
know the other thing we do to young
people this really made me disenchanted
in some ways with what was happening in
universities there were many reasons for
that disenchantment but you know the
other thing that we
convince young people of right when
they're in their Messianic phase that's
a piagetian developmental State between
about 16 and 20 is that the way forward
morally to take your place in broader
Society is by taking the root of
political activism and that basically
means that what you do to be a moral
person is to identify the perpetrators
of the apocalyptic catastrophe and then
go make life miserable for them instead
of teaching young people that no you
should actually spend a few decades
developing the knowledge necessary to
make some real progress on these fronts
you should assume that there's some
cabal of enemies that you've identified
when you're 18 and you certainly
shouldn't assume that the mere fact that
you're out waving a placard and
protesting means that you're on the
right side of history or even on your
own or even in relationship to your own
psychological developments so my
interaction with young people these days
is mostly through the courses I teach at
NYU I teach climate uh and then energy
two separate courses to Master's level
students and fortunately I think already
they're a mix of Engineers and mbas so
they have this desire to actually do
something positive rather than simply as
you say wave flags and complain about
what's being done and what I find in
both courses is how much the eyes get
opened up uh whether it's about the
climate science which I teach almost
entirely out of the ipcc and the
research literature or the energy which
I teach you know both the Technologies
the business the regulation and so on
and you know I think uh it's gratifying
to see eyes open up that's one of the
great benefits of being a teacher is as
you know but also it shows to me that
people can spend a little bit of time to
learn some of these base
and then be
critically questioning inquisitive uh
about these very complicated but
important subjects right well and it's
also very heartening to know that you
can do that at NYU and that that's
working yeah yeah you know when when I
was about to publish the book uh I sent
uh the manuscript to both the president
and the Provost uh whom I know well
since former academic administrators
tend to hang out together uh and their
response was you know Steve I don't know
if I agree with everything you've
written but you've got a right to say it
and we support that well thank God for
that so all right well look that's
probably a good place time to close
we're at about the end of our 90 minutes
here on YouTube I'm I'm going to talk to
Dr coonan a bit more on the daily wire
plus platform as many of you who are
watching and listening know I like to
take my guests and do some investigation
into their particular biography because
I think it's useful for people to hear
about how
people's successful Destiny makes itself
manifest in their lives and it also
helps please me on the clinical front
because I like finding out about
people's lives and so we're going to
switch over to the Daily wire plus
platform to do that for about half an
hour
thank you very much for agreeing to talk
to me today and for bringing what you
know to the attention of all the people
who will be watching this and listening
across the podcast platforms and on
YouTube and and it's very it's it's
quite
um positive to to be speaking with so
many people who are knowledgeable now
about the you know climate apocalypse
and who have drawn the conclusion that
this is something that we can handle and
that we can handle in a very good way if
we were even remotely careful and and uh
hopefully that will be as you pointed
out maybe the tide is starting to turn
on this and we're going to start to
understand that we can think in terms of
centuries and that we can actually
manage this
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com